he is his nation strongman savior of
Russian pride and Russian manhood but
Vladimir Putin sits astride a corrupt
state he has gone cemani the guilty
secrets so much money's being stolen so
many people have been killed this is a
president with an astonishing past if
you put these people in the United
States or in Canada and check what
they've done debt criminals I'm Jillian
Finlay and this is the Fifth Estate
it's May 2012 and Vladimir Putin arrives
at the Kremlin to be sworn in for the
third time as Russia's president it's an
historic day the culmination of a
remarkable ascent from unemployed spy to
modern-day czar
this man has a remarkable story to
Andrei Zhukov was once the city of st.
petersburg's
top police investigator in 1999 he
wanted to arrest blat amir putin on
charges of corruption threatened Tecmo
steadiness not valued toy buzzes could
putin be held criminally responsible
based on the evidence that has already
been gathered absolutely yes russian
scholar karen dawisha has come to the
same basic conclusion i mean a whole
range of economic crimes abuse of power
abuse of his official position
involvement in relations with organized
crime knowledge about money laundering
estonia por la noche president Abbas's
idiocy like many in the West though we
sure had assumed that Putin was a
Democrat or at least an aspiring a
former adviser to both US and British
governments dawisha has written several
books on Russian politics
her latest turns that hopeful Western
assumption on its head
I started thinking instead of seeing
Russia as a as a democracy in the
process of failing we need to see it as
an authoritarian system in the process
of succeeding that that they're not
actually incapable of being Democrats
they don't want to be Democrats what
about that let's work on that thesis and
if that's correct
when did that start and that's what took
me to the 90s because they were stealing
from the very beginning
Russia in the 90s was a desperate place
the certainties of the old Soviet system
were gone
what would replace it wasn't clear to
anyone least of all to a young ex KGB
officer named Vladimir Putin in 1990
he'd returned from a posting in East
Germany and was out of work but he did
have an important contact in st.
Petersburg City Hall Anatoly Sobchak his
former law professor would soon become
the city's first democratically elected
mayor when he did he appointed Putin his
deputy and crucially to chair the city's
Committee on foreign economic relations
he was the linchpin he controlled which
foreign companies could register their
offices and receive offices after I'll
remember all this property with Soviet
property Soviet Union hadn't fallen yet
so how was a company going to get access
to property to set up a branch in San
Petersburg Putin Putin would have to
assign it
his star rose quickly and in a hint of
image-making to come putin commissioned
a documentary about himself called
simply power
but there were many sources of power in
st. Petersburg in those days
some of them criminal subject needed a
person who could work in the shadows and
according to political analyst Dennis
Lovell Kowski Putin was perfect st.
Petersburg halted bandit capital of
Russia gangster capital version at that
moment and the mayor's office should
communicate to those Europe in some way
but of course not release of Chuck could
not be involved in such contacts and it
was Bloody Mary person who was in charge
but Putin had his work cut out for him
the collapse of the Soviet system
brought terrible shortages and there was
little foreign currency to buy food
abroad to fill the shelves oil and other
resources were to be bartered in his
propaganda film the deputy mayor assured
hungry residents that food was on its
way
Malaka Soviet decision poor teachers
keep the diversity the trouble was most
of the food never arrived as despair
turn to anger a city councilor named
marina Sal yang was appointed to find
out what had happened years later she
still had all her documents and was
still clear about what went wrong and
who she believed was to blame so without
going into all the details I'll tell you
from this document signed by Putin all
124 million disappear without a trace
without a trace because from this list
of materials that I have listed not a
single gram of food came and what
happened was fly-by-night companies were
set up many of his friends who were
still around today were behind those
companies the goods went out and
incomplete or no shipments came back so
millions millions were made just in that
episode alone solely a turned the case
over to prosecutors we concluded that
Putin and his assistant should be fired
the City Council agreed but subject
intervene to protect Putin and it
wouldn't be the last time that the mayor
and his deputy would be linked to
corruption in a monastery six hours from
st. Petersburg a man comes seeking peace
this former federal investigator is
haunted by case number 144 one to eight
Lieutenant Colonel Andrei Zhukov
investigated a construction company
called 20th trust a company registered
by Putin's economic relations committee
his conclusion crimes had definitely
been committed gotta be who did what
does it was so two and a half billion
rubles worth transferred to the
company's account the way it worked was
the funds were supposed to be used for
specific building projects but ended up
being used for completely different
purposes the investigation tracked how
the city paid 20th trust to do work how
the work was never done and how much of
the money disappeared in one case he
says siphoned off to build Spanish
vacation villas for Putin and his
cronies not about changing it was theft
Savchuk and Putin should have been
jailed and would be in jail undoubtedly
Putin who will be first and foremost as
the greatest number of documents and
orders were signed by him Putin would
not go to jail and neither would subject
although his days as mayor were numbered
in 1996 tainted by yet another
corruption scandal
he lost the st. Petersburg election his
widow
ludmila gnilova remembers difficult days
even lost a system God do kogda in 1996
when subjects stopped being mayor as is
often the case in the Russian elite a
lot of people immediately turn their
backs on it which in loogies resort very
modest Vladimir Putin was nearly the
only one that didn't do that Kotori at
the Vinicio
that loyalty would soon be tested under
questioning by prosecutors sub chuck
apparently suffered a heart attack was
rushed to hospital and eventually right
out of the country in a highly
orchestrated departure the ex-mayor fled
justice on a national holiday weekend
aboard a private plane arranged by
Vladimir Putin Vladimir Putin helped me
organize that risking everything
weeks later subject would re-emerge in
Paris looking surprisingly healthy and
Putin's reliability would be noted all
the way to the Kremlin
when we come back explosions shake a
country but who's to blame
I wouldn't proceed with the rest of is
deal we're a part of a part two initial
solution is native to a little by man we
if something exam over prosecute against
it
by the late 1990s Vladimir Putin had
moved up in the world again
now he was in the Kremlin where crisis
had said he a sick and often drunk Boris
Yeltsin was teetering his way to the end
of his presidency his administration -
the focus of a massive corruption
investigation having parceled out much
of Russia's wealth - a band of oligarchs
allowed aides and family members to
enrich themselves as well there was fear
in the Yeltsin camp about what might
happen if his successor proved less than
understanding in Putin they saw a man
who protected his old boss the former
mayor of st. Petersburg now there was a
new boss who needed help well I think
what they saw in him was that he had
protected subshock and as they said he
didn't give up subshock and he's not
going to give us up how vulnerable were
they at the time very vulnerable in 1999
Yeltsin not only made Putin prime
minister but declared him his successor
but there was a problem before Putin
could get down to the business of
protecting the Yeltsin family he had to
get elected and Russians had no idea who
he was and so once again an instant
biography was commissioned of the former
spy Natalya Kevorkian was one of the
biographers she now lives in
self-imposed exile in Paris what was the
narrative that they wanted out just just
his everything I mean where he comes
from who is he why he was in KGB or
whether he likes it or not because
everybody was speculating about KGB like
he was that was the main thing about him
he's the KGB man that's all so what they
wanted to present him that he is a
normal human being he has parents he had
biography
his biography tells of an only child who
grew up poor and scrappy an unusual boy
who at age 16 went to the local KGB
office and asked to join up he was told
to come back later he did with a law
degree and after training he was sent to
a posting in East Germany once and
always KGB
can you explain to Western audience what
does that mean they they are the people
who prefer to operate in shadow they are
the people which are like state is first
and people are second all these kind of
things pretty hasn't you and if you
cannot I don't think he can change it
you know it's unchangeable before
becoming Yeltsin's Prime Minister Putin
had already served as head of the KGB
successor agency the FSB the fundamental
point about the person is his KGB
training
edu 'kiss is an author and senior editor
at The Economist magazine he specializes
in Russian affairs and this organization
attracts a particular breed of people
tough unscrupulous people and it trains
them in a way that makes them even tough
and even more scrupulous ways they have
ways of persuading people of bending
them to their will playing all sorts of
psychological tricks and games
tremendous sense of self-righteousness
that they alone are the true guardians
the national interest
in the fall of 1999 then the national
interest appeared to be in peril bombs
obliterated for apartment buildings in
Moscow and other cities hundreds of
people killed in their sleep all of a
sudden an unknown Prime Minister was
everywhere the embodiment of Russian
anger and revenge wouldn't proceed with
the rest of his deity very opportune
apart to initial solution is if toilet
Dept me if certain executive author and
journalist david satter has investigated
the apartment bombings Putin was viewed
by the public as the person who was
avenging this horrific attack against
innocent Russian civilians whoever was
responsible for that attack had
committed a horrible crime and by
placing himself in the center of the
effort to avenge that crime Putin
managed to gain a lot of instant
popularity
his first act was to point the finger at
Chechen separatists the Russian
officials said that there was a Chechen
trail ha in the apartment bombings not
proof of Chechen involvement a Chechen
trail it wasn't clear what that meant
but it was used in order to justify a
new invasion of Chechnya and Putin's
invasion would be brutal
in Chechnya thousands would die in
Russia he would become a national hero
you quickly became the most popular
politician in Russia even though before
the apartment bombings he was believed
to have had no chance to succeed Yeltsin
as president if it was a strategy it
worked
six months later Russia had a new
president a modern man the world fought
ready to take his country into the
future
but 15 years later questions of the past
still haunt this place it's a monument
to those who perished in the apartment
bombings why they died and who was
responsible have never been adequately
answered mikhail trepashkin was hired by
one family to try he's a former KGB
officer himself and a lawyer who had his
own doubts about the official story
doubts that only grew when he saw the
reaction of his former security service
colleagues it was they live in the
shadow store and hiccup I they were
telling me don't dig into it otherwise
you will get imprisoned yourself and
then specifically they were telling me
in a straightforward way
just leave it if you don't want to have
troubles and I was saying that well I'm
the former investigator and I have
experience and I can help I can run my
own investigation but there would be
many obstacles put in his way
the Russian government destroyed all the
evidence in the case of the earlier
bombings no sooner had the bombings
taken place than bulldozers showed up -
to remove the rubble including human
remains and that case they destroyed the
crime scene but then something else
would happen far away from Moscow that
would cast even more doubt on the
government's explanation of what
happened here in another apartment
building in another town residents
noticed strangers putting sacks into a
basement there the residents called the
police the police called the bomb squad
which quickly discovered that the sacks
marked sugar in fact contained the same
explosive that had been found in the
Moscow box it was a military-grade
explosive called hexagon the detonator
was one commonly used by Russia's
military as well but what really
cemented the scandal the strangers who'd
placed the bomb under questioning they
admitted they were secret agents of the
FSB I think that the evidence that there
was an FSB operation to place explosives
in the apartment building in reason is
incontrovertible
to murder your own citizens as they
sleep in their beds for political
reasons how do you wrap your head around
that on a personal level I think it is
an example of evil I personally have
concluded that it was one of the worst
things I can think of the suspicion that
the Kremlin itself was responsible for
killing so many has been raised in
several documentaries and books and
investigations but Putin has called the
charge utterly insane in trials that
were widely questioned the number of
people were convicted of the bombings
none of them Chechens or members of the
FSB since then it's proven dangerous to
ask questions people who tried to
investigate the apartment bombings in
many cases ended up dead the list is
long Sergei Yushchenko a Russian
politician who headed an investigative
committee gunned down outside his home
Anna Politkovskaya
a well-known journalist and Putin critic
also killed in her apartment elevator
and Alexander Litvinenko a former SFB
officer who publicly accused Putin of
ordering the bombs died in London
poisoned with polonium each of the
murder investigations remains clouded in
suspicions Sergey Markov is a longtime
Russian analyst authorized to speak on
president Putin's behalf there have been
a number of credible investigations that
have concluded that this was the work of
the FSB and could not have happened
without the knowledge of mr. Putin it
was a no one credible investigation
which shows that it had been done by FS
bear all this propagandistic quasi
investigation just using tricks and so
on I already had
this story about this episode the
building consumer score maybe hundred of
times and all these people free no who
would nobody was in jail
don't became victim of propaganda it's
very dangerous also mikhail trepashkin
knows that he became a victim too one
week before he was to report his
findings to a parliamentary
investigation he found himself pulled
over at a highway roadblock as much it
the Astana media so they stopped me at
the police checkpoint where there was a
crowd of people they checked my
identification twice and checked the car
and they didn't find anything
and when I was closing it one of the
officers threw in a bag and that told
him that's not mine
why are you putting that in my car you
open the bag and said here is the gun
here is the gun and I was immediately
arrested braga trepashkin was sent to
prison for two years after his release
he continued to speak out about his
investigation and was jailed for two
more years
well the apartment bombings they cost
thousands of innocent lives both Russian
and Chechen by starting a new war they
brought to power someone from the
security services and that's Putin who
of course had no interest in democracy
the first thing Putin did after becoming
president was grant Boris Yeltsin
immunity from prosecution
but his administration quickly moved to
ensure Putin's safety to case number 144
one to eight that corruption
investigation in st. Petersburg quietly
went away
Salah Leela the prosecutor general gave
an order that the criminal case should
be terminated it was explained to us
that criminal investigations are not
pursued in relation to the president
investigators ich hoffe can only wonder
how history might have been different if
he'd been allowed to arrest Russia's
president people with respect civil law
because everyone would understand that
if the president can be prosecuted then
in essence power officials would
understand that the law has to be
protected as it now stands Russia has no
when we come back
Putin who's the West
where is all of you
of all Vladimir Putin's strategies for
maintaining power charm is not to be
underestimated
he seduced Russians with carefully
crafted imagery the West with promises
that he was a man they could do business
with George Bush famously came to that
conclusion after simply looking into his
eyes Putin's trained in the KGB to
deceive foreigners he has a very sharp
eye for human weakness he's good at
persuading people and intimidating them
and he's been doing this with Western
leaders sometimes with charm sometimes
with threats but boy does he do it
if Western leaders hope that Putin would
steer Russia towards their ideals of
democracy liberalism and capitalism a
meeting in 2003 would underscore just
how wrong they were
it was an extraordinary gathering in the
Kremlin's historic st. Catharines Hall
in attendance the nations oligarchs
those who'd become billionaires under
Boris Yeltsin and who had their own
hopes for Putin as well the richest of
them all the man with the glasses on the
Left mikhail hora coughs key to finish
though i got the impression that he was
our a person of our generation scary
anarchic Alenia what do you mean by that
our generation vocally known as radik
luna should keep bolivia our parents
generation they have a totalitarian view
even if they're against it as opposed to
our generation we're closer to the west
but by the early 2000s the West was
cracking down on corruption new
legislation had just been passed in the
United States if Russians wanted access
to financial markets they'd have to
start playing by new rules the
officially Tamura by 2003 corruption was
already the key method of state
governance used by the bureaucrats and
bureaucrats started to demand the kind
of money that was impossible to hide
first let it why have to make a choice
built companies that are open and
listing or do business Russian style in
other words pay bribes receive
privileges but remain within a closed
system we decided the question was worth
a discussion in the meeting Horak offski
asked to speak frankly mustafa corrosive
Rossi at CMA expert the material
hardness 'it's a written agenda cover a
unit it's Tim Miller the feds anyway
it's a dollar as I understand it what
you were essentially doing with the
television cameras running was accusing
the President of Russia of running a
corrupt state nominally a Evo Legion of
current Iran did not accuse him
personally of corruption and this is not
how he do that in a string of letters to
you
yes I did accuse his inner circle and
him of creating a model that uses
corruption as his backbone and he told
me that we took part in creating that
model we bring in my chest if says then
yet a Mandela deliveryman at that point
Putin turned the tables reminding Horak
offski that his oil company Yukos was
facing troubles now that that does naka
was the company registered and at the go
aerialists knowledge I lose me rinoa she
pretends he was a cruise ship problema
the Croatia problem mr. Justin no cactus
problem always nucleus was a veiled
threat delivered with a cold smile yang
Isha toss the mobile honest - lovely
aching mr. bear did I realize it would
provoke Putin displeasure of course it
did but I thought he would choose the
European model and I was not the only
one thinking that because it was
obviously more beneficial for the
country achieve Eden a believer good not
Islamic but Putin also perceived
horochowski as a political threat keep
in funding opposition parties and
spending money promoting democracy the
meeting in the Kremlin sealed his fate
eight months later he was arrested his
oil company dismantled and divided among
Putin loyalists Russia's richest man
would serve 10 years in a Siberian
prison camp
today he lives in exile in Switzerland
and has no doubts about Putin's legacy
Nigella won her till on Chappell stones
mojit at first he talk you could build
sort of a democratic model that he could
control a model like this does not exist
so he story to slide towards at first
mild totality rien ISM and then an
increasingly harsh totalitarianism if
the situation develops further he will
reach a full totalitarian model in
reality every authoritarian system is a
kleptocracy you later clip the critique
the roots of that kleptocracy have been
exposed in a number of investigations
throughout Europe
in Germany a money laundering probe
uncovered documents linking Putin to the
Tambov sky a mafia group in Saint
Petersburg in Spain diplomatic cables
released by WikiLeaks quoted a Spanish
investigator calling Russia of virtual
mafia state and questioning whether
Putin was implicated and whether he
controlled the Russian mafias actions if
you put these people in the United
States or in Canada and check what
they've done they're criminals Valeri
Morozov is a Russian construction
magnate who did a lot of work for the
Kremlin before going into exile in
London corruption didn't start with
Putin he says but under Putin it was
perfected he changed immediately the
whole system but not changed he made it
different he made it in order
it is everywhere it is a system
Sergei Kalashnikov is another Russian
tycoon who lives in exile he fled to
Tallinn Estonia he's known the system
from the inside and claims the
corruption goes all the way to the top
it prints a property Russian business
entirely depends on protection you need
protection it is called having a roof or
in Russian Krisha so she's to attack
Russia in the most creature you have the
more successful your business will be so
every businessman dreams about giving
presents and gaining protection and if
you give a present to the president it's
like having God himself watching your
back wheels rattle gasps pitbull
Kalashnikov used to run one of Putin's
gifting projects and explain to us how
the scheme worked a business puts money
into a charity in this case Paul of Hope
Kalashnikov company called Petro med
then takes the money to buy medical
equipment purchased from Siemens
but the profit margin is huge around 40%
and that money gets funneled through a
myriad of other companies to end up in
something called Rus invest before he
fled Kalashnikov says he owned 2% of
Ross and vest who owned 94% Mir poof
shipwreck all investments all projects
of rose invest were only implemented if
Putin said yes to it no activity would
have been possible without his
acknowledgement bring it really sucks
so where did the money go according to
Kalashnikov it was diverted to build a
palace and not just any palace this
multi hundred million dollar
extravaganza overlooking the Black Sea
near Sochi
today I'm not sure what reality TV /
Gordon I started saying that I'm not
happy with all the finances going for
his palace and I was told
Putin is Lazar and you are his serve
Putin said I think hello
Kalashnikov believes his scheme was only
one of many ways Putin made money hidden
in a labyrinth of shady structures often
held by others how much is a matter of
speculation but also some educated
guesswork on the part of Moscow
political analysts stanislav belk offski
i started such investigations more than
seven years ago and in late 2007 type
published my estimate the assets being
kind or poses personal control it was
the figure of 40 billion dollars 40
billion dollars a figure that was later
confirmed by the CIA according to press
reports and that it's true would make
russia's president one of the richest
men in the world
but what happens when that man no longer
sits atop of the system that made him so
rich a 2007 US State Department Cable
again made public by WikiLeaks reported
that as he neared the end of his second
presidential term Putin was worried he
understood according to the cable that
there was no rule of law in Russia no
way to ensure the safety of his secret
assets abroad held by proxies to leave
power would be dangerous and Russia's
president knew it has never been a good
succession model in the Soviet Union or
in Russia and he's very worried about
how he will leave Polly doesn't believe
in a coffin he doesn't want to go to a
jail cell and he doesn't really have the
mechanism to do it because he has got so
many guilty secrets so much money's been
stolen so many people have been killed
so many unspeakable abuses happened that
he doesn't really trust anyone to look
after to keep him safe if he steps down
from past in a way he's both the master
of the Kremlin but also a prisoner in it
Putin kept his proximity to power by
swapping places with his Prime Minister
in 2008
three years later he was pushed aside
and Putin announced he'd run for
president again that brought masses of
angry Russians onto the streets for a
time russia's strongman almost seem
vulnerable
but the demonstrations work well and
Vladimir Putin would go on to win his
third election in a vote widely noted
for its irregularities when we come back
Putin on the offensive he has a very
strong sense of entitlement that Russia
has stuff taken away from it during the
Soviet collapse and Russia has the right
to get it back
by 2012 Vladimir Putin was Russia's
president again this time with an even
longer mandate presidential terms had
been extended to six years which means
Putin could remain in power till 2024
but the Russia he rules over is not the
country he promised to build in the
cities there is a veneer of prosperity
born of high oil prices but the economy
has been pillaged productivity little
better than in Soviet times and in the
vast reaches where the majority of
Russians live conditions remain
stubbornly medieval Putin's greatest
fear is that the Russians will realize
that his modernization project has
failed he came into power promising to
make Russia into a modern Western
country and it's still basically a
corrupt backward country the bottom line
just to put it with two numbers two
numbers is all we need the median or the
midpoint wealth for the average Russian
is 871 dollars according to Credit
Suisse very neutral report $871 means
half the population has more than that
in wealth and half the population has
less median wealth in India over $1000
so the average Russian is poorer than
the average Indian so that's one number
871 the other number is 110 110
individuals own 35 percent of the wealth
of Russia they are the most unequal
country by far in the world
now to distract from that a very
powerful tool he's got his anti West
Ness and blame the West for everything
that's going wrong blame the West indeed
for the isolation and stagnation of
Russia and coupled that with a very
powerful propaganda machine where all
the mass media is under Kremlin control
and he's in very good position he has a
very strong sense of entitlement that
Russia has stuff taken away from it
during the Soviet collapse and Russia
has the right to get it back
q the nationalist cart in 2000 poten
waged war in Chechnya in 2008 Georgia in
the last year he has redrawn the map of
Ukraine annexing Crimea and supporting
rebels in the former republics eastern
regions it's all played well at home on
the streets where they demonstrated
against him two years earlier the
invasion of Crimea had Russians singing
putin's praises and the West concerned
about economic ties with Russia unsure
what to do and we see a series of
escalating provocations against the West
going back many years at every stage we
try and overlook it and keep on trying
to bring mr. Putin in when you bite into
our summit meetings we try and treat
Russia as a normal country and we think
we're trying to calm things down but in
fact what we're doing is we're staking
things were giving mr. Putin the
impression that were not to be taken
seriously and he continued to push us
harder and harder and harder and that's
extremely dangerous
after putin's adventures in crimea the
united states called for strong
sanctions against russia but in the
capitals of Europe there was reluctance
until July and an act of violence that
would change everything
Malaysian air flight mh17 brought down
over eastern Ukraine almost certainly by
separatists using a Russian supplied
weapon 298 people were killed and the
West was finally galvanized to act I
demand that Russia fully cooperate with
the criminal investigation of the
downing of mh17 it's necessary to make
it clear but it will not be business as
usual when posing Russia's aggression
against Ukraine which is a threat to the
world as we saw in the appalling
shoot-down of mh17 in November at the
g20 meeting in Australia Putin was
relegated to the margins of the class
photo Obama and European leaders who'd
once welcomed him as one of their own no
distance themselves at lunch Russia's
president seemed a lonely figure and he
left the summit early but the country he
headed back to was in even deeper crisis
plummeting oil prices our ruble in
freefall and new robust sanctions
beginning to take their toll
the question now on many minds is what
does Vladimir Putin do next to some a
story from his boyhood could yet prove
telling it happened in this building
where he once shared a one-room
apartment with his parents and it
involved a rat that Putin had cornered
biographer Natalya Kevorkian he said
that I learnt very good I learned
forever
don't try to push somebody into the
corner they will jump too because when
you don't have whatcha lose you just you
attack I think it's it's absolutely true
about himself when he is in the corner
that's why he's dangerous he can jam he
will not say okay let's talk he will
jump